AT THE TOMB OF CHRISTIAN ROSENKREUTZ We had still not seen the corpse of our wise and prudent Father, and so we moved the altar to one side. Then we could raise a strong plate of yellow metal, and there lay a beautiful, illustrious body, whole and uncorrupted ..., and in his hand he held a small parchment book, written in gold and entitled T., which, after the Bible, is our greatest trea- sure, one that should not be lightly submitted to the world’s censure. Fama Fraternitatis Roseae Crucis I When, awakened from this sleep called life, We ﬁnd out what we are and what This fall into Body was, this descent Into the Night that obstructs our Soul, Will we ﬁnally know the hidden Truth about all that exists or ﬂows? No: not even the freed Soul knows it. Nor does God, who created us, contain it. God is the man of a yet higher God. A Supreme Adam, He also fell. Our Creator, He was also created, And was cut off from the Truth. The Abyss, His Spirit, hides it from Him in the beyond. In the World, His Body, it doesn’t exist. II Before all that there was the Word, here lost When the already extinguished Inﬁnite Light Was raised from Chaos, the ground of Being, Into Shadow, and the absent Word was obscured. But though it feels its form is wrong, the Soul sees At last in itself—mere Shadow—the glowing Word of this World, human and anointed, The Perfect Rose, cruciﬁed in God. Lords, then, on the threshold of the Heavens, We may search beyond God for the Secret Of our Master and the higher Good; Wakened from here and from ourselves, we’re freed At last in Christ’s present blood from worshiping The God who makes the created World die. III Ah, but here where we still wander, unreal, We sleep what we are, and although in dreams We may at last see the truth, we see it (Since our seeing is a dream) distortedly. Shadows seeking bodies, how will we feel Their reality if we ﬁnd them? What, as Shadows, can we touch with our shadowy Hands? Our touch is absence and vacancy. Who will free us from this closed Soul? We can hear, if not see, beyond the hall Of being, but how make the door swing open? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lying before us, calm in his false death And with the shut Book pressed against his chest, Our Rosy Cross Father knows, and says nothing. [Autumn ?]