from SLANTING RAIN I My dream of an inﬁnite port crosses this landscape And in the ﬂowers’ colors I see the sails of large ships Casting off from the wharf, dragging the silhouettes of these old Sunlit trees as their shadows over the waters... The port I dream of is somber and pallid, And the landscape is sunny viewed from this side... But in my mind today’s sun is a somber port And the ships leaving the port are these sunlit trees... Freed into two, I slid straight down the landscape... The substance of the wharf is the clear and calm road That rises, going up like a wall, And the ships pass through the trunks of the trees In a vertically horizontal fashion, Dropping their lines in the water through the leaves one by one... I don’t know who I dream I am . . . Suddenly all the seawater in the port is transparent And I see on the bottom, like a huge print unrolled across it, This entire landscape, a row of trees, a road glowing in that port, And the shadow of a sailing ship older than the port and passing Between my dream of the port and my looking at this landscape, And it approaches me, enters me, And passes to the other side of my soul... III The Great Sphinx of Egypt dreams inside this sheet of paper... I write—and she appears to me through my transparent hand And the pyramids rise up in a corner of the paper... I write—and I’m startled to see that the nib of my pen Is the proﬁle of King Cheops... I freeze... Everything goes dark . . . I fall into an abyss made of time... I’m buried under the pyramids writing verses by the bright light of this lamp And the whole of Egypt presses down on me through the strokes I make with my pen... I hear the Sphinx laughing to herself The sound of my pen running over the paper . . . An enormous hand, passing through my not being able to see her, Sweeps everything into the corner of the ceiling that’s behind me, And on the paper where I write, between it and the pen that’s writing, Lies the corpse of King Cheops, looking at me with wide-open eyes, And between our gazing at each other ﬂows the Nile, And a gaiety of ﬂag-bedecked ships meanders In a hazy diagonal line Between me and what I’m thinking... Funeral of King Cheops in old gold and Me!... V Outside a whirlwind of sun the horses of the merry-go- round... Within me a static dance of trees, stones and hills... Absolute night in the brightly lit fair, moonlight on the sunny day outside, And the fair’s many lights make noises out of the garden walls... Groups of girls with jugs on their heads Passing by outside and drenched by the sun Cut across thick crowds of people at the fair, People mixed up with the lights of the stands, with the night and the moonlight, And the two groups meet and blend Until they form just one which is both... The fair, the fair lights, the people at the fair And the night that seizes the fair and lifts it into the air Are above the tops of the trees drenched by the sun, They’re visible beneath the rocks that gleam in the sun, They pop out from behind the jugs carried on the girls’ heads, And the whole of this spring landscape is the moon above the fair, And the whole fair, with its sounds and lights, is the ground of this sunny day . . . Suddenly someone shakes this twofold hour as if in a sieve, And the powder of the two realities, mixed together, falls On my hands full of drawings of ports Where huge sailing ships are casting off with no intention of returning... Powder of white and black gold on my ﬁngers... My hands are the steps of that girl leaving the fair, Alone and contented like this day... []