UN SOIR À LIMA The voice on the radio returns, Announcing in an exaggerated drawl: “And now Un Soir à Lima ...” I stop smiling... My heart stops beating... And from the unconscious receiver That sweet and accursed melody Breaks forth... My soul loses itself In a suddenly resurrected memory... The wooded slope shimmered Under the great African moon. The living room in our house was large, and everything Between it and the sea was lit up By the dark brilliance of that gigantic moon... But only I stood by the window. My mother was at the piano And played... That very same Un Soir à Lima. My God, how distant and irrevocably lost all that is! What has become of her noble bearing? Of her dependably soothing voice? Of her full and affectionate smile? What there is today To remind me of all that is this melody, Our melody, Still playing on the radio, None other than Un Soir à Lima. Her graying hair was so lovely In the light, And I never thought she would die And leave me at the mercy of who I am! She died, but I’ll always be her little boy, Because no one, for his mother, is ever a man! ◆ And even through tears my memory Still preserves The perfect medallion image Of that yet more perfect proﬁle. My forever childish heart weeps When I remember you, mother, so Roman and already graying. I see your ﬁngers at the keyboard, and the moonlight Outside shines eternally in me. In my heart you play, without ceasing, Un Soir à Lima. ... “Did the little ones go right to sleep?” “Yes, right to sleep.” “This girl here is almost asleep.” And, smiling as you spoke, you continued Playing, Attentively playing, Un Soir à Lima. All I was when I wasn’t anyone, All I loved and only now know I loved, now that I have no remotely Real path, now that I have only Nostalgia for what was— It all lives in me Through lights and music And my heart’s undying vision Of that eternal hour In which you turned The unreal page of music And I heard and saw you Continue the eternal melody That lives today In the eternal depths of my nostalgia For the time when you, mother, played Un Soir à Lima. And the indifferent receiver Transmits from the unconscious station Un Soir à Lima. I didn’t know then that I was happy. I know it now, because I no longer am. “This girl here is also sleeping...” “No she isn’t.” We all smiled, And I, Far from the hard and lonely Moon that shone outside, Absentmindedly kept listening To what made me dream without realizing it, To what nowadays makes me feel sorry for myself, That gentle song without voice, just the sounds Of the keys my mother played: Un Soir à Lima. ◆ If only I could have that entire scene Right here, complete and distilled, Tucked away in a drawer, Tucked in one of my pockets! If only I could yank From space, from time, from life, That living room, that hour, The whole family and that peace and that music, Isolating it all In some part of my soul Where I could have it Forever Alive, warm, As real as it is back there Even now, When, mother, dear mother, you played Un Soir à Lima. Mother, mother, I was your boy Whom you taught to be So well-behaved, And today I’m a rag Rolled into a ball by Destiny and tossed Into a corner. There I pathetically lie, But the memory of what I heard and what I knew Of affection, of home and of family Rises to my heart in a swirl, And remembering it I heard, today, my God, all alone, Un Soir à Lima. Where is that hour, that home, that love From when, mother, dear mother, you played Un Soir à Lima? And my sister, Tiny and snuggled up in a stuffed chair, Didn’t know If she was sleeping or not... ◆ I’ve been so many vile things! I’ve been so unfaithful to who I am! How often my parched, Subtle reasoner’s spirit Has abundantly erred! How often even my emotion Has unfeelingly deceived me! Since I have no home,  I at least dwell In this vision Of the home I had then.  I at least listen, listen, listen, There by the window Of never again ceasing to feel, In that living room, our warm living room In capacious Africa where the moon Outside shines vast and indifferent, Neither good nor bad, And where, mother, In my heart, mother, You visibly play, You eternally play Un Soir à Lima. ... ◆ My stepfather (What a man! what heart and soul!) Reclined his calm and robust Athlete’s body In the largest chair And listened, smoking and musing, His blue eyes without any color. And my sister, then a child, Curled up in her chair, Heard while sleeping And smiling That someone was playing Perhaps a dance... And I, standing before the window, Saw all the moonlight of all Africa ﬂooding The landscape and my dream. Where did all of that go? Un Soir à Lima ... Shatter, heart! ... ◆ ... But I’m dizzy. I don’t know if I’m seeing or if I’m sleeping, If I am who I was, If I’m remembering or if I’m forgetting. Something hazily ﬂows Between who I am and what I was, And it’s like a river, or a breeze, or a dreaming, Something unexpected That suddenly stops, And from the depths where it seemed it would end There emerges, more and more clearly, In a nimbus of softness and nostalgia Where my heart still lingers, A piano, a woman’s ﬁgure, a longing... I sleep in the lap of that melody, Listening to my mother play, Listening, now with the salt of tears on my tongue, to Un Soir à Lima. ◆ The veil of tears does not blind me. Crying, I see What that music gives me— The mother I had, that home from long ago, The child I was, The horror of time because it ﬂows, The horror of life because it only kills. I see, and fall asleep, And in my torpor, having forgotten I still exist in the world of today, I watch my mother play. Those small white hands, Whose caresses will never again comfort me, Play on the piano, carefully and calmly, Un Soir à Lima. Ah, I see everything clearly! I’m back there once more. I turn away my eyes that had been gazing At the uncommon moon outside. But wait, my mind rambles, and the music is over... I ramble as I’ve always rambled, With no inner certainty about who I am, Nor any real faith or ﬁrm rule. I ramble, I create my own eternities With the opium of memory and abandon. I enthrone fantastical queens But have no throne for them to sit on. I dream because I wallow In the unreal river of that recollected music. My soul is a ragged child Sleeping in a dusky corner. All I have of my own In true, waking reality Are the tatters of my abandoned soul And my head that’s dreaming next to the wall. Oh isn’t there, mother, dear mother, Some God to save all this from futility, Some other world in which this lives on? I continue to ramble: everything is illusion. Un Soir à Lima ... Shatter, heart...   