At the wheel of the Chevrolet on the road to Sintra, In the moonlight and in a dream, on the deserted road, I drive alone, I drive almost slowly, and it almost Seems, or I make myself think it seems, That I’m going down another road, another dream, another world, That I’m going without Lisbon lying behind me and Sintra up ahead, That I’m going, and what’s in it besides not stopping, just going? I’ll spend the night in Sintra since I can’t spend it in Lisbon, But when I get to Sintra I’ll be sorry I didn’t stay in Lisbon. Always this irrational, irrelevant, useless fretfulness, Always, always, always This exaggerated mental anxiety over nothing, On the road to Sintra, on the road of dreaming, on the road of life... Responsive to my subconscious movements at the wheel, The borrowed car bounds forward beneath me, with me. As I think about the symbol and turn right, I smile. How many borrowed things I’ve used to go forward in the world! How many borrowed things I’ve driven as if they were mine! Alas, how much I myself am what I’ve borrowed! On the left side of the road there’s a cabin—yes, a cabin. On the right the open country, with the moon in the distance. The car, which so recently seemed to be giving me freedom, Is now something that closes me in, Something I can only drive if I’m closed inside it, Something I control only if I’m part of it, if it’s part of me. Behind me on the left the humble—more than humble— cabin... Life there must be happy, just because it isn’t mine. If anyone saw me from the cabin window, they’re no doubt thinking: That guy is happy. Perhaps to the child peering out the top-ﬂoor window I looked (with my borrowed car) like a dream, a magical being come to life. Perhaps to the girl, who as soon as she heard the motor looked out the kitchen window On the ground ﬂoor, I’m something like the prince of every girl’s heart, And she’ll keep glancing through the window until I vanish around the curve. Will I leave dreams behind me, or is it the car that leaves them? I the driver of the borrowed car, or the borrowed car I’m driving? On the road to Sintra in the moonlight, in sadness, with ﬁelds and the night before me, Driving the borrowed Chevrolet and feeling forlorn, I lose myself on the road to come, I vanish in the distance I’m covering, And on a sudden, frantic, violent, inexplicable impulse I accelerate... But my heart is still back at that heap of stones I skirted when I saw it without seeing it, At the door of the cabin, My empty heart, My dissatisﬁed heart, My heart that’s more human than I, more exact than life. On the road to Sintra, close to midnight, in the moonlight, at the wheel, On the road to Sintra, exhausted just from imagining, On the road to Sintra, ever closer to Sintra, On the road to Sintra, ever farther from myself...   