SALUTATION TO WALT WHITMAN Portugal, Inﬁnity— eleventh, nineteen hundred and ﬁfteen... Hey-la-a-a-a-a-a-a! From here in Portugal, with every historical age in my brain, I salute you, Walt, I salute you, my Universal brother, Forever modern and eternal, the singer of concrete absolutes, Passionate mistress of the scattered universe, Great homosexual who rubs against the diversity of things, Sexualized by stones, by trees, by people, by professions, Full of lust for passing bodies, chance encounters, mere observations, Champion of the material substance of all things, My glorious hero who goes into Death skipping, Greeting God with shouts and roars and squeals! Singer of ﬁerce and tender brotherhood with all things, Great democrat in all your pores, close in body and soul to everything, Carnival of all actions, bacchanalia of all intentions, Twin brother of all initiatives, Jean-Jacques Rousseau of the world bound to produce machines, Homer of the elusive carnal ﬂux, Shakespeare of sensations that were beginning to run on steam, Milton-Shelley of Electricity on the horizon! Incubus of all gestures, Inner spasm of all outer objects, Pimp of the whole Universe, Slut of all solar systems, pansy of God! I, with my monocle and exaggeratedly tight-waisted coat, Am not unworthy of you, Walt, and you know it. I’m not unworthy of you, for the simple reason that I salute you... I, so prone to inertia and so easily bored, Am one of yours, you know I am, and I love and understand you, And although I never met you, being born around the year you died, I know you loved me too, you knew me, and it gladdens my heart. I know that you knew me, considered me and explained me, And I know that that’s what I am, whether on the Brooklyn Ferry ten years before I was born Or on the Rua do Ouro today, thinking about everything that’s not the Rua do Ouro, And as you felt everything, I feel everything, we walk hand in hand, Hand in hand, Walt, hand in hand, dancing the universe in our soul. I kiss your picture all the time. Wherever you are now (I don’t know where, but I know it’s God) You feel this, I know you feel it, and my kisses (in person) are warmer, Which is how you want them, and so you thank me from where you are, I’m sure of it, something tells me so—a satisﬁed feeling in my spirit, An indirect, abstract erection in the depths of my soul. You were cyclopean and muscular, not pretty, Yet your attitude toward the world was feminine, And for you each leaf of grass, each stone and each man was the Universe. Here’s to you, dear old Walt, my great Comrade, evoe! I belong to your Bacchic orgy of unbridled sensations, I’m one of yours—from the feeling in my feet to the nausea in my dreams. I’m one of yours, look at me. From where you are, in God, you see me in reverse, From inside out...You d ivine my body; what you see is my soul, Seeing it directly, and through its eyes my body. Look at me: you know that I, Álvaro de Campos, engineer, Sensationist poet, Am not your disciple, not your lover, and not your singer. You know I’m You and are glad for it! I can never read much of your poetry at once ...It’s too full of feeling... I move through your verses as through a jostling crowd, And they smell to me of sweat, of various oils, of human and mechanical activity, So that I ﬁnally don’t know if I’m reading or living, I don’t know if my true place is in the world or in your poetry, I don’t know if I’m here, with both feet on the natural earth, Or if I’m hanging upside down in some sort of emporium, Dangling from the natural ceiling of your tumultuous inspiration, From the middle of the ceiling of your unattainable intensity. Open all the doors! I’m coming through! My password? Walt Whitman! But to hell with a password... I’ll just come on through... I’ll break down the doors if I have to... Yes, I who am meek and civilized will break down the doors, Because in this moment I’m not meek or civilized, I’m ME, a thinking universe of ﬂesh and blood that wants to get through And that will get through, for when I want to get through, I’m God! Get this rubbish out of my sight! Stash these emotions into drawers! Away with politicians, literati, Smug businessmen, policemen, prostitutes, pimps! All of this is the letter that kills, not the spirit that gives life. The spirit that gives life in this moment is ME! Let no son of a bitch cross my path! My path is through inﬁnity all the way to the end! Whether or not I can reach the end is none of your business, let me go, It concerns only me, and God, and the meaning-that’s-me of the word Inﬁnite... For ward ! I dig in the spurs! And I feel the spurs, I’m the selfsame horse I ride, Because I, through my will to be one with God, Can be everything, or nothing, or anything, Depending on my mood...It’s no one else’s business... Raging delirium! I want to yelp, to leap, To rant, rave, jump, twirl and shout with my body, To cling to car wheels and get rolled over, To lie beneath the twisting of the whip that’s going to crack . . . . . To be the she-dog of all he-dogs and still not be satisﬁed, To be the ﬂywheel of all machines and never go fast enough, To be whatever’s crushed, abandoned, uprooted, destroyed, And all for you, to sing and salute you . . . . . Dance with me this delirium, Walt, in the world where you are now, Hop with me in this tribal dance that bumps into the stars, Fall with me to the ground from exhaustion, Dash with me into the walls until we’re dazed, Shatter with me into smithereens . . . . . In all, through all, around all, without all, An abstract bodily rage stirring maelstroms in the soul... Come on! Forward! Even if God tries to stop us, let’s go forward...It d oesn’t matter... Let’s go forward, Forward, to no place at all... Inﬁnity! The Universe! Goal with no goal! What does it matter? Boom! boom! boom! boom! boom! Right now, yes, let’s go, straight ahead, boom! Boom! Boom! Hup-hup . . . hup-hup . . . hup-hup . . . hup-hup... Like a hurled thunderbolt I rush Toward you in leaps of the heart. With military bands leading the way, I keep saluting you... In a grand procession with frenzied shouting and jumping I scream out your name at the top of my lungs, And every cheer for me and for you and for God I give to you, And the universe spins around us like a carousel with music inside our heads, And I, with intrinsic lights in my anterior epidermis, Mad from the drunken, musical hissing of machines, And you, the renowned, the reckless, you ( ...) ◆ And so it’s to you I address My verses that are leaps, my verses that are jumps, my spasm verses, My hysterical-attack verses, My verses that pull the carriage of my nerves. Tripping and stumbling I get inspired, I’m so excited I can hardly breathe or stand still, And my verses are my not being able to burst from living. Throw open all the windows! Rip all the doors off their hinges! Pull the house down on top of me! I want to live at large in the open air, I want to have gestures outside my body, I want to run like rain down the walls, I want to be stepped on like the paving stones of roadways, I want to sink like a dead weight to the bottom of the sea, With a sensuality I lost ages ago! I don’t want latches on the doors! I don’t want locks on coffers! I want to mix in, to merge, to be swept along, I want to become someone else’s aching possession, To be dumped out of garbage cans, To be tossed into the sea, To be sought out at home for obscene purposes— Anything but to keep on sitting here quietly! Anything but to keep on writing these verses! I want a world without gaps! I want objects to materially touch each other and interpenetrate! I want physical bodies to belong to each other like souls, Not just dynamically but statically too! I want to ﬂy and to fall from high up! To be hurled like a grenade! To end up in X, to be taken to Y... Abstract apogee at the end of me and of everything! Motorized iron climax! Stairless staircase of speed climbing higher! Hydraulic pump extracting my throbbing guts like an anchor! Put me in shackles just so that I can break them! So that I can break them with my teeth and make my teeth bleed! O masochistic, blood-spurting joy of life! The sailors took me prisoner. Their hands squeezed me in the darkness, And I died for a moment when I felt this. Then my soul licked the ﬂoor of my private jail To the shrill buzzing of impossibilities surrounding my ire. Leap, jump, bite down on the bit, Red-hot Pegasus of my restless yearnings, Uncertain end of my motorized destiny! Jump, leap, drape yourself with ﬂags, Mark the nocturnal vastness with your trail in blood, In hot blood stretching far behind you, In fresh blood stretching far behind you, In cold, living blood through the air I dynamically feel! Jump, hurdle, leap, Alley-oop, keep jumping . . . . . ◆ My cavalcade-prayer! My forward charge-salutation! Who besides you felt the individual life in each thing? Who besides you felt himself, and life and us to exhaustion? Who besides you always preferred the spare part to the regular one And made it his norm to violate Life’s norms and forms? . . . . . My happiness is a rage, My forward charge a collision (Bam!) In me... In you, O Master of my healthful disease, I salute the ﬁrst classic case of universalitis, The “Whitman syndrome,” which is what afﬂicts me! St. Walt of Shrieking Deliriums and Rage! ◆ Gateway to everything! Bridge to everything! Road to everything! Your omnivorous soul . . . . . Your soul that’s bird, ﬁsh, beast, man, woman, Your soul the two where there are two, Your soul the one that’s two where two are one. Your soul that’s arrow, lightning, space, Embrace, nexus, sex, Texas, Carolina, New York, Brooklyn Ferry in the evening, Brooklyn Ferry coming and going, Libertad! Democracy! The twentieth century up ahead! Boom! boom! boom! boom! boom! BOOM! You, what you were, what you saw, what you heard, Subject and object, active and passive, Here and there, everywhere you, A circle encompassing all ways of feeling, Milestone of all things possible, God-Boundary of all objects imaginable—that’s you! You the Hour, You the Minute, You the Second! You interspersed, liberated, unfurled, departed, Interspersion, liberation, departure, unfurlment, Intersperser, liberator, unfurler, sender, Postmark on all letters, Name in all addresses, Merchandise delivered, returned, in transit... Train of sensations moving at soul-miles per hour, Per hour, per minute, per second. BOOM! And all these natural, human and machine noises Go together, a sum tumult of everything, Full of me to you, saluting you— Human shouts and earthly cries, Echoes from hills, The burbling of waters, The loud blasts of war, The weeping clamor of suffering peoples, The mufﬂed sounds of sighs in the darkness. And closer to life, surrounding me (And it’s my ﬁnest prize for saluting you), There are the whistles, chugging and screeching of trains, The modern noises, factory noises, Steady hum, Motor wheels, Flywheels, Propellers Boom... ◆ In a great all-cities-of-Europe marche aux ﬂambeaux , In a great war march of industry, commerce and leisure, In a great race, in a great rise, in a great fall, Howling, jumping, and everything jumping with me, I leap up and salute you, I salute you with loud shouts, I salute you with a burst of somersaults, handstands and hoorays! Hey-la! (...) ◆ Hey-la, I’m going to summon All the human swarming of the Universe, All varieties of all emotions, All types of all thoughts, All wheels, all gears and all pistons of the soul To the blaring, deafening privilege of saluting you. Hup-hup! I shout, And in a procession of Me to you they all rumble In a metaphysical and real gibberish, In an uproar of things clashing within me . . . . . Ave, hail, hurrah, O great bastard of Apollo, Passionate, impotent lover of the nine Muses and three Graces, Funicular from Olympus to us and from us to Olympus, Rage of the modern materialized in me, Transparent spasm of being, Flower of other people’s actions, Joyous feasting because there’s Life, Mad fury because no one has enough life to be all men, Since being means being a bastard, and only God could satisfy us. Ah, you sang everything and yet left everything unsung. Who in his body can throb harder than his body throbs? Who can feel more feelings than there are to feel? Who can be sufﬁcient when nothing sufﬁces? Who can be complete as long as one blade of grass Has its root outside his heart? ◆ Open all the doors! Break all the windows! Remove the locks from this enclosing life! Remove this enclosing life from this enclosing life! Let closing be openness, with no locks as reminders, Let “stopping” be the ignorant term for continuing, Let the end be an always abstract thing, Fluidly connected to every end ever reached. I want to breathe! Strip my body of all its weight! Replace my soul with abstract wings attached to nothing! No, not wings, just the enormous Wing of Flight itself! No, not even Flight, just the speed that remains when ceasing becomes ﬂying And there’s no body to weigh down the soul of Going! I want to be the heat of living things, the fever Of saps, the rhythm of waves and the . . . . . Gap in Being that allows Being to be...! No boundaries anywhere! No divisions in anything! Just Me. ◆ Where I’m not the ﬁrst, I prefer to be nothing, to not be there. Where I can’t be the ﬁrst to act, I prefer to watch others act. Where I can’t rule, I refuse even to obey. I ardently yearn for everything, so ardently that I never miss ou t , And I don’t miss out because I don’t try. “All or nothing” has a special relevance for me. But I can’t be universal, because I’m individual. I can’t be all men, because I’m One, just one, just me. I can’t be ﬁrst in anything, because there is no ﬁrst. And so I prefer the nothing of being nothing but that nothing. When does the last train leave, Walt? I want to leave this city known as Earth, I want to emigrate from the country of Me once and for all, To leave the world like a man who realizes he’s bankrupt, Like a traveling salesman who sells ships to people from the interior. To the junk heap with broken motors! What was my entire being? An enormous, useless yearning, A sterile pursuit of an impossible goal, A madman’s machine to achieve perpetual motion, An absurd theorem to prove that a circle is square, An attempt to swim across the Atlantic that failed Before I ever entered the water, just by looking at it and calculating, A hail of stones at the moon, An absurd desire for the two parallels of God and life to meet. My nerves’ megalomania, My rigid body’s yearning for elasticity, My physical self ’s rage because it’s not the sovereign axis, The sensual vehicle of abstract enthusiasm, The world’s dynamic void! Let’s leave Being behind us. Let’s leave for good this small town called Life, This suburb-World of God, And let’s venture into the city headlong, Without stopping, just madly Going... Let’s go away once and for all. When does the last train leave for where you are, Walt? What God was I that my nostalgia should arouse such yearnings? Perhaps by departing I’ll return. Perhaps by ending I’ll arrive— Who knows? Any time is the right time. Let’s leave, Come on! The road is waiting for us. To leave is to have already gone. Let’s leave for where everything stays put. O road to no-more-roads! The last stop of No-Stopping! ◆ In my poems I sing of trains, I sing of cars, I sing of steamers, But however high I hoist my poem, it has only rhythms and ideas, It has no steel, iron or wheels, it has no wood, no ropes, It lacks the reality of a road’s most negligible stone, The stone people step on without ever looking at it But which may be looked at, picked up, stepped on. Whereas my poems are like ideas that may or may not be understood. What I want is iron, not just to sing of iron. What I think gives only the idea of steel, not the steel. What infuriates me in all my mind’s emotions Is that I can’t swap my rhythm that mimics rippling water For the real coolness of water on my hands, For the visible sound of the river where I can enter and get wet, Which can make my suit drip, Where I can drown myself, if I like, And which has the natural divinity of being there without literature. Shit! A thousand times shit for everything I can’t do. But what, Walt (can you hear me?), is everything, everything, everything? Damn the bad luck of our not being God Such that our ﬂesh could write poems in Universes and Realities, And our ideas be things, our thoughts Inﬁnity! And I’d have real stars in my thinking-being, Number-names in every corner of my emotion-Earth. ◆ The true modern poem is life without poems, It’s the train itself and not verses that sing of it, It’s the iron of the rails, the hot rails, the iron of the wheels, their actual spin, And not my poems that talk about rails and wheels they don’t have. ◆ The wind-up or string-pulled train of a child Has more real motion than our poems... Our poems that don’t have wheels, Our poems that go nowhere, Our unread poems that never leave the page. (I’m sick of life, sick of art, Sick of not having things, either out of lack or out of fear— My breathing like a practical joke to torment me, My self-image like a ridiculous carnival puppet. When does the last train leave?) I know that the way I sing of you isn’t by singing of you, but so what? I know it’s by singing of everything, but to sing of everything is to sing of you. I know it’s by singing of me, but to sing of me is to sing of you. I know that even to say I can’t sing is to sing of you, Walt... ◆ To sing of you, To salute you, I’d have to write the supreme poem Which, more than any other supreme poem, would embrace In a total synthesis (based on an exhaustive analysis) The whole Universe of things, living beings and souls, The whole Universe of men, women and children, The whole Universe of acts, gestures, feelings, thoughts, The whole Universe of the things mankind makes And the things mankind experiences— Professions, laws, norms, medical sciences, Fate, Written this way and that, constantly crisscrossing On the dynamic paper of Events, On the quick papyrus of social groupings, On the palimpsest of continuously renewed emotions. ◆ For me to salute you, To salute you as you should be saluted, I need to make my verses into a steed, Make my verses into a train, Make my verses into an arrow, Make my verses sheer speed, Make my verses the things of the world. You sang everything, and in you everything sang— Magniﬁcent whorish receptivity Of your sensations with their legs wide open To the outlines and details of the whole universe. ◆ Hup-hup what, or why, or to where? Hup-hup to what end? Hup-hup to where, make-believe steed? Hup-hup to where, imaginary train? Hup-hup to where, O arrow, haste and speed Which are all just me pining after you, All just me feeling your absence in every last nerve? Hup-hup to where, if there is no where or how? Hup-hup to where, if I’m always where I am and never up ahead, Never ahead and never behind But always irremediably in the place of my body, All too humanly in the thinking center of my soul, Always the same indivisible atom of the divine personality? Hup-hup to where, O sadness of not achieving what I want? Hup-hup to where and for what? Hup-hup what or without what? Hup-hup-hup, but where to, O my uncertainty? If only I could stop writing verse on verse on verse about iron And see, have and be iron instead, and have that be my poetry, Poetry-iron-poetry, psycho-physio-I circle! (When does the last train leave?) ◆ Time for our vitality to declare bankruptcy! We write poetry, singing of the things we don’t live: our bankruptcies. If only there were a way to live all lives and all ages And all forms of form And all gestures of gestures! What’s the writing of poetry but a confession that life isn’t enough? What’s art but a way to forget that life is just this? Farewell, Walt, farewell! Farewell until the indeﬁnite that lies beyond the End. Wait for me, if where you are you can wait. When does the last train leave? When do we leave? ◆ Hup-hup? Hup what and hup why? What do I get from hup-hup or from anything Prompting me to think of hup-hup? Decadents, old boy, that’s what we are... Deep down in each of us there’s a Byzantium in ﬂames, And although I don’t feel the ﬂames and don’t feel Byzantium, The Empire is dying out in our watery veins, And Poetry was but our incapacity to act... You, singer of vigorous professions, You the Poet of the Strong and the Extreme, You, inspiration’s muscle, ruled by male muses, You, ﬁnally, an innocent in a state of hysteria, Finally just a “caresser of life,” A shiftless idler, a pansy at least in spirit. That was your business, nobody else’s, but where’s Life in all that? I, an engineer by profession, sick of everything and everyone, I, absolutely superﬂuous, at war with things, I, useless, worn-out, unproductive, pretentious and amoral, Buoy of my sensations scattered by the storm, Anchor in the depths that broke off from my ship, I—can you believe it?—a singer of Life and Power, I, healthy and vigorous like you in my poems, And even sincere like you, burning with all Europe in my brain, In my explosive brain with no dikes to contain it, In my dynamic master intelligence, In my trademark, projector, bank-check, rubber-stamp sensuality. Why the devil do we live, and write verses? Damn the sloth that makes us poets, The degeneracy that fools us into thinking we’re artists, The fundamental tedium that tries to pass us off as energetic and modern When all we really want is to amuse ourselves, to savor an idea of life, Since we do nothing and are nothing, life limply ﬂowing through our veins. Let’s at least see things as they really are, Walt... Let’s swallow all this like a bitter pill And agree to send life and the world to hell Because we’re tired of looking at it, not because we abhor or disdain it. Is this any way to salute you? Whatever it is, it’s to salute you. Whatever it’s worth, it’s to love you. Whatever it comes to, it’s to agree with you. Whatever it is, it’s this. And you understand, you like it. You, old boy, crying on my shoulder, agree with me... (When does the last train leave? A long holiday spent in God... Let’s go without fear, let’s go ...) All this must have another meaning Beyond just living and having all we have... There must be a point of consciousness In which the landscape is transformed And begins to interest us, assist us, arouse us, In which a cool breeze stirs in our soul And sunny ﬁelds open up in our recently awakened senses... We’ll meet at the Station, wherever it is... Wait for me at the entrance, Walt; I’ll be there... I’ll be there without the universe, without life, without myself, without anything... And we’ll remember, all by ourselves, in silence and with our sorrow, The world’s tremendous absurdity, the bitter inadequacy of things, And I’ll feel the great mystery, I’ll feel it far away, so far aw a y, So abstractly and absolutely far away, Deﬁnitively far away. ◆ I stop, I listen, I recognize myself! The sound of my voice in the air has fallen, lifeless. I’m the same as I was, you are dead, and everything is still... Saluting you was a way of trying to inject life into myself, And so I saluted you in spite of feeling that I lack The vital energy to salute anyone! O heart that won’t heal! Who will save me from you? []