MARITIME ODE Alone this summer morning on the deserted wharf, I look toward the bar, I look toward the Indeﬁnite, I look and am glad to see The tiny black ﬁgure of an incoming steamer. It’s still far away but distinct, classic in its own way. It leaves a useless trail of smoke in the air far behind it. It’s coming in, and the morning with it, and here and there Along the river maritime life begins to stir: Sails are hoisted, tugboats advance, Small boats jut out from behind the anchored ships. There’s a slight breeze. But my soul is with what I least see, The incoming steamer, Because it’s with the Distance, with Morning, With the maritime meaning of this Hour, With the sweet pain that rises in me like a queasiness, Like the onset of seasickness, but in my soul. I look at the far-off steamer with great independence of mind, And in me a ﬂywheel slowly starts spinning. The steamers coming in around the bar in the morning Bring to my eyes The happy and sad mystery of all who arrive and depart. They bring memories of distant wharfs and other moments Of another sort of the same humanity in other ports. Every landing and every sailing of a ship Is—I feel it in me like my own blood— Unconsciously symbolic, terribly Fraught with metaphysical meanings That stir up in me the man I once was... Ah, every wharf is a nostalgia made of stone! And when the ship shoves off And we suddenly notice a space widening Between the wharf and the ship, Then I’m hit by a fresh anxiety I can’t explain, A mist of sad feelings Glistening in the sun of my grassy anxieties Like the ﬁrst dawn-lit window, And it wraps me as if it were someone else’s remembrance Now mysteriously mine. Ah, who knows, who knows If I didn’t already set sail from a wharf A long time ago, before I ever was—if I, a ship In the slanting light of dawn, Didn’t already depart from another kind of port? Who knows if, long before the outer world as I know it Dawned for me, I didn’t already depart From a large wharf full of a few people, From a large, half-awakened city, From a huge, commercial, overgrown and apoplectic city, As far as this is possible outside of Space and Time? Yes, from a wharf, a wharf in some sense material, Real, with the form of a wharf, a wharf in fact, The Absolute Wharf whose model we’ve unconsciously imitated, Unwittingly evoked, to build Our wharfs that serve our ports, Our wharfs of literal stone over actual water, And once they’re built they strike us without warning as Real Things, Spirit Things, Soul-Stone Beings, At certain moments of root feeling When a door in the outer world seems to open And, without anything changing, Everything proves to be different. Ah the Great Wharf from where we set sail in Nation-Ships! O Great Primordial Wharf, eternal and divine! Of what port? Over what waters? And why do I wonder? Great Wharf like other wharfs, but the only One. Rustling, like them, with predawn silences And blossoming with morning to the noise of cranes And arriving freight trains, Under an occasional, thin black cloud Of smoke from nearby factories That shades the black and shiny, coal-sprinkled ground Like the shadow of a cloud passing over dusky waters... Ah, what essence of mystery and senses arrested In revelatory divine ecstasy At hours colored by silence and anxieties Forms the bridge between any wharf and The Wharf! Wharf blackly reﬂected in still waters, The bustle on board ships, O wandering, restless soul of people who live in ships, Of symbolic people who come and go, and for whom nothing lasts, For when the ship returns to port There’s always some change on board! O never-ending ﬂights, departures, drunkenness from Diversity! Eternal soul of navigators and navigations! Hulls slowly mirrored in the water As the ship pulls out of port! To ﬂoat like life’s soul, to sally forth like a voice, To live the moment gently tossing on eternal waters, To wake up to days more immediate than Europe’s, To see mysterious ports bordering the sea’s solitude, To round far-off capes and ﬁnd sudden vast landscapes Of countless startled slopes... Ah, the distant beaches, the wharfs seen from afar, And then the beaches close up, the wharfs in plain view. The mystery of every departure and every arrival, The sad instability and inscrutability Of this impossible universe Felt more deeply in the skin with each passing maritime hour! Our souls’ absurd sobbing Over the expanses of diverse seas with isles in the distance, Over the distant islands ﬂanking the coasts not visited, Over the ports that grow clearer with their houses and people As the ship approaches. Ah, how fresh the mornings of arrivals are, And how pallid the mornings of departures, When our insides tighten into a ball And a vague sensation akin to fear —The ancestral fear of leaving what we know and going away, The mysterious ancestral fear of Arrival and the New— Makes us shrink in our skin with anxiety. And the whole of our anguished body, as if it were our soul, Feels an inexplicable desire to feel all this In some other way. There’s a nostalgia for something, A stirring of affection, but for what uncertain country? What coast? What ship? What wharf? The thought languishes, And we’re left with a large inner void, A hollow satiety of seaborne minutes, And a vague anxiety that would be weariness or sorrow If it knew how to be either... Even so, the summer morning is slightly cool. A slight torpor of night still wafts in the shaken air. The ﬂywheel in me spins a bit faster. And the steamer is coming in, because I know it must be coming And not because I can see it moving at such a great distance. In my imagination it’s already close by and visible All up and down its rows of portholes, And everything in me trembles, all my muscles and ﬂesh, Because of that person who never arrives in any boat And whom I’ve come to wait for today, because of an oblique command. The ships coming in around the bar, The ships setting out from ports, The ships passing in the ofﬁng (I imagine myself watching them from a deserted beach), All these abstract ships about to depart— All these ships move me as if they were more Than mere ships, ships coming and going. And ships seen from up close, even if we’re not going to embark on them, Seen from below, from the skiffs, next to the steel broadsides, Seen from inside, in the cabins, the lounges, the storerooms, Seeing up close the masts tapering high overhead, Brushing against the ropes, descending the cramped stairways, Smelling the greasy metallic and maritime mixture of all this— Ships seen from up close are something else and are the same, Stirring the same nostalgia and the same yearning in another way. The seafaring life! All that it embraces and all that it is! All of its sweet seduction ﬁlters into my blood, And I daydream indeﬁnitely of voyages. The distant coastlines, ﬂattened by the horizon! The capes, islands, and sandy beaches! The maritime solitudes, like certain moments in the Paciﬁc When by the power of some suggestion learned in school Our nerves feel the weight of its being the largest ocean, And the world and the taste of things become a desert in us! The splashier, more human expanse of the Atlantic! The Indian Ocean, the most mysterious of all! And the Mediterranean, without mystery, soft and classical, a sea that washes Esplanades eyed by white statues in nearby gardens! How I’d love to hold all seas, all straits, all bays and all gulfs Against my chest, feel them close, and die! And you, O nautical things, my old dream toys! Be my inner life, outside me! Keels, masts and sails, helms, rigging, Smokestacks, propellers, topsails, pennants, Tiller ropes, hatchways, boilers, pipes and valves, Fall inside of me in a heap, one big heap, Like the jumbled contents of a drawer dumped out on the ﬂoor! Be the treasure of my feverish greed, Be the fruit of the tree of my imagination, Theme of my songs, blood in the v eins of my intellect, The aesthetic link between me and the outside! Provide me with metaphors, images, literature, Because really and truly, seriously, literally, My sensations are a boat with its keel in the air, My imagination a half-sunken anchor, My yearning a broken oar, And the web of my nerves a net left to dry on the beach! Somewhere on the river a single whistle blows. The entire ground of my psyche is now trembling. The ﬂywheel in me keeps moving faster. Ah, the steamers, the voyages, the not-knowing-the- whereabouts Of so-and-so, a seaman of our acquaintance! Ah, the glory of knowing that a man who palled around with us Was drowned off an island in the Paciﬁc! We who knew him will tell this to everyone With all due pride and a quiet conviction That all this has a broader and more beautiful meaning Than just the loss of the ship on which he sailed And his sinking to the bottom with his lungs full of water! Ah, the steamers, the coal ships, the sailing ships! How rare, alas! sailing ships are becoming on the high seas! I who love modern civilization and kiss machines with all my soul, I the engineer and sophisticate who studied abroad, Would love to see once again only wooden ships and sailing vessels, To know no other seafaring life besides the ancient life of the seas! For the ancient seas are Absolute Distance, The Pure Faraway, free of the weight of Today... Ah, how everything here reminds me of that better life, Of those seas that were larger, since navigation was slower, Of those seas that were mysterious, since no one knew much about them! Every faraway steamer is a nearby sailing ship. Every distant ship seen now is a ship from the past seen up close. All the invisible sailors aboard ships on the horizon Are visible sailors from the time of the old vessels, From the slow, sail-driven age of perilous voyages, From the wood and canvas age of voyages that took months. The delirium of maritime things slowly takes hold of me, The wharf and its atmosphere physically penetrate me, The surging of the Tagus inundates my senses, And I begin to dream, to be wrapped by the dream of the wat ers , The transmission belts on my soul start turning hard, And I’m visibly shaken by the ﬂywheel’s increasing speed. The waters call me, The oceans call me, The faraway calls me with a bodily voice, And it’s every seafaring age there ever was, calling. It was you, Jim Barnes, English sailor and my friend, Who taught me that ancient English cry Which so virulently sums up For complex souls like mine The confused call of the waters, The uncanny, implicit voice of all maritime things, Of shipwrecks, of long voyages, of dangerous crossings. That English cry of yours, which in my blood becomes universal, A cry like no other, without human form or voice, That tremendous cry which seems to resound Inside a cavern whose roof is the sky And seems to tell all the sinister things That can happen in the Faraway, on the Sea, at Night... (You always pretended to be calling a schooner, Cupping your large, dark and weathered hands On the sides of your mouth to make a megaphone, crying: Aho-o-o-o-o-o-o-o o-o-o----yyyy... Schooner aho-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o----yyyy ...) I can hear you from here, now, and I wake up to something. The wind shudders. The morning rises. The heat sets in. I feel my cheeks redden. My conscious eyes dilate. Ecstasy stirs, increases, ascends in me. And with a blind, riotous hum The ﬂywheel’s restless spinning intensiﬁes. O clamorous call Whose heat and fury make all my yearnings Seethe in one explosive ensemble, And even my tediums—all of them!—become dynamic... An appeal made to my blood By an old love from I don’t know where that returns With still enough strength to allure and pull me, With still enough power to make me hate this life I live amidst the physical and psychic impermeability Of the real people all around me! Ah, to depart! By whatever means and to whatever place! To set out across the waves, across unknown perils, across the sea! To go Far, to go Wide, toward Abstract Distance, Indeﬁnitely, through deep and mysterious nights, Carried like dust by the winds, by the gales! To go, go, go once and for all! All of my blood lusts for wings! All of my body lurches forward! I rush through my imagination in torrents! I trample myself underfoot, I growl, I hurtle! My yearnings burst into foam And my ﬂesh is a wave crashing into cliffs! Thinking about this—O rage! Thinking about this—O fury! Thinking about the smallness of my life full of yearnings, Suddenly, tremulously, extraorbitally, With a vicious, vast and violent rocking Of the restless ﬂywheel of my imagination, The dark and sadistic libido of the strident maritime life Breaks out of me whistling, hooting, and raving. Hey sailors, look-outs! Hey shipmates, pilots! Navigators, seamen, mariners, adventurers! Hey ship captains! Hey men at the helm and on the masts! Men who sleep on wooden bunks! Men who sleep with Danger peeking through the portholes! Men who sleep with Death for a pillow! Men who have decks and bridges from where they can gaze Upon the vast vastness of the vast sea! Hey crane operators! Hey sail trimmers, stokers, cabin boys! Men who load cargo in the holds! Men who coil ropes on deck! Men who polish the hardware of the hatches! Men at the helm! men on the engines! men on the masts! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Men with peaked caps! Men in mesh undershirts! Men with anchors and crossed ﬂags embroidered on their chests! Tattooed men! Men with pipes! Men on the gunwales! Swarthy from so much sun, shriveled from so much rain, Clear-eyed from so much vastness all around them, Bold-faced from so much wind having pounded them! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Men who’ve seen Patagonia! Men who’ve been to Australia! Men who’ve feasted your eyes on coasts I’ll never see! Who’ve landed in lands where I’ll never set foot! Who bought primitive goods in colonies at the fore of hinterlands! And you did all of this as if it were nothing, As if this were natural, As if life were simply this, As if you weren’t even fulﬁlling a destiny! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Men of today’s ocean! Men of yesterday’s ocean! Pursers! Galley slaves! Combatants at Lepanto! Pirates from Roman times! Mariners from Greece! Phoenicians! Carthaginians! Portuguese launched from Sagres Into an uncertain adventure, onto the Absolute Sea, to achieve the Impossible! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Men who erected stone pillars and gave names to capes! Men who traded for the ﬁrst time with black people! Who ﬁrst sold slaves from new lands! Who bestowed the ﬁrst European spasm on startled Negro women! Who brought back gold, beads, fragrant woods, arrows, From hillsides bursting with lush vegetation! Men who pillaged peaceful African villages, Who put the natives to ﬂight with booming cannons, Who killed, who robbed, who tortured, who won The reward of New Things for rushing headlong Into the mystery of new seas! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey! I salute all of you in one man, and one man in all of you, All of you mixed together, all intermingled, All of you bloody, violent, hated, feared, fabled, I salute you, I salute you, I salute you! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Hey-la-oh-la-oh-la-OH-la-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah! I want to go with you, I want to go with you, With all of you at the same time To every place you’ve been! I want to meet head-on the same dangers you met, To feel on my face the winds that withered yours, To spit from my lips the salt of the seas that kissed yours, To help swab your decks, to be with you in storms, To arrive like you, ﬁnally, at extraordinary ports! To ﬂee with you from civilization! To lose with you all sense of morality! To feel my humanity change in faraway places. To drink with you in southern seas New savageries, new tumults in my soul, New central ﬁres in my volcanic spirit! To go with you, to take off (Get the hell out of here!) My civilized man’s suit, my mild-mannered ways, My congenital fear of chains and fetters, My peaceful life, My seated, static, orderly and repetitive life! To the sea, the sea, the sea, the sea! Ah, throw my life to the wind, to the waves, To the sea! Salt with windblown foam My taste for great voyages! Thrash with whipping water the ﬂesh of my adventure, Douse with the cold depths the bones of my existence, Scourge, cut and shrivel with winds, foams and suns My cyclonic, Atlantic being, My nerves stretched out like taut shrouds, A lyre in the hands of the winds! Yes, yes, yes ...C rucify me on your ocean crossings And my shoulders will revel in my cross! Tie me to your voyages as if to stakes, And the sensation of the stakes will enter through my spine And I’ll feel them in a vast, passive ecstasy! Do what you like with me, as long as it’s at sea, On ship decks, to the sound of waves. Wound me, rip me open, kill me! All I want is to take to Death A soul overﬂowing with Sea, Drunk silly on maritime things, On sailors as well as on anchors, ropes, On distant coasts as well as on the winds’ howling, On the Faraway as well as on the Wharf, on shipwrecks As well as on peaceful trade operations, On masts as well as on the waves, To take to Death—in voluptuous pain— A body covered with leeches sucking away, Covered with strange, absurd, green sea leeches! Make shrouds out of my veins! Hawsers out of my muscles! Flay my skin and nail it to the keels! And let me feel the pain of the nails and never stop feeling it! Make my heart into an admiral’s ﬂag On a ship of old in time of war! Yank out my eyes and grind them into the deck with your feet! Smash my bones against the gunwales! Tie me to the masts and thrash me, thrash me! To all the winds of all latitudes and longitudes Spill my blood over the r aging waters That sweep across the poop deck In the storms’ wild convulsions! To have the audacity of sailcloth in the wind! To be, like the topsails, the whistling of the winds! An old guitar playing a fado about seas rife with dangers, A song for sailors to hear and not repeat! The sailors who mutinied Hung the captain from a sail yard. Another they left on a desert isle, Marooned! The sun of the tropics has made my taut veins seethe With the fever of old-time piracy. The winds of Patagonia have tattooed my imagination With tragic and obscene images. Fire, ﬁre, ﬁre, inside me! Blood! blood! blood! blood! My brain is bursting! The world as I know it explodes in red! My veins snap with the sound of cables! And from deep within booms the savage and insatiable Song of the Great Pirate, The bellowing death of the Great Pirate, whose singing Sends a chill down the spine of his men. Astern he dies, howling his song: Fifteen men on a dead man’s chest, Yo-ho-ho and a bottle of rum! And then yells in a blasting, unreal voice: Darby M’Graw-aw-aw-aw-aw! Darby M’Graw-aw-aw-aw-aw-aw-aw-aw! Fetch a-a-aft the ru-u-u-u-u-u-u-u-u-um, Darby! Ah, what a life! what a life that was! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Hey-la-oh-la-oh-la-OH-la-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Split keels, sunken ships, blood on the seas! Decks awash in blood, sectioned corpses! Severed ﬁngers left lying on gunwales! Heads of children here and there! People with gouged eyes shouting, screaming! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! I bundle up in all this as in a cloak when it’s cold! I rub against all this like a cat in heat against a wall! I roar for all this like a famished lion! I rush at all this like a crazed bull! I dig my nails into this, break my claws on it and chew it till my teeth bleed! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Suddenly I hear the old cry, Now harsh, angry, metallic, Like a bugle blasting at my side, Calling the sighted prey, The schooner that’s going to be seized: Aho-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o----yyyy... Schooner aho-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o----yyyy... The World has ceased to exist for me! I’m burning red! I roar in fury for the attack! Pirate chief! Pirate Caesar! I plunder, kill, rip, slash! All I feel is the sea, the prey, the pillage! All I feel within are the veins of my temples Beating, and beating me! The sensation of my eyes is bleeding hot blood! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Ah pirates, pirates, pirates! Love me and hate me, pirates! Take me into your midst, pirates! How your rage and cruelty speak to the blood Of a woman’s body that once was mine and whose lust has survived! I’d love to be an animal that would embody all your acts, That would sink its teeth into the hulls and keels, That would eat masts, drink blood and tar on ship decks, Chew sails, oars, ropes and pulleys— A monstrous, female sea-serpent gorging on your crimes! And there’s a symphony of incompatible and analogous sensations, An orchestration in my blood of deafe ning crimes, Of convulsive clamors from bloody orgies on the high sea, All raging like a torrid gale through my mind, A cloud of hot dust obscuring my perception So that I see and dream all this with my skin and veins only! Pirates, piracy, vessels and the hour, The maritime hour when prey are captured And the terror of the captured escapes into madness— that hour With all its crimes, terror, vessels, people, sea, sky, clouds, Breezes, latitude, longitude, shouting voices, I’d like the Whole of this to be the Whole of my body, suffering, To be my body and my blood, to form the stuff of my being in red, To thrive like an itching wound in my soul’s unreal ﬂesh! Ah, to be everything in every crime! To be all the component parts Of raids on ships, of slaughters and rapes! To be whatever was on the spot where pillages occurred, To be whatever lived or was left dead on the site of gory tragedies! To be the sum-total-pirate of all piracy at its zenith, And the ﬂesh-and-blood synthesis of all pirate victims in the world! To be in my passive body the woman-all-women Ever raped, killed, cut and mauled by pirates! To be in my submissive self the female who needs to be theirs! And to feel all this—all these things all at once—running down my spine! O my hairy and gruff heroes of adventure and crime! My seafaring brutes, husbands of my imagination! Casual lovers of my oblique sensations! I long to be That Woman who waits for you in ports, For you, heinous men she loves in dreams with her pirate blood! For she would rage with you, though only in spirit, Over the naked corpses of your victims at sea! For she would be with you in your crimes, and in your oceanic orgy Her witch’s spirit would invisibly dance around each movement Of your bodies, your cutlasses, your strangling hands! On land she would wait for you, and when you came, if you came, In your love’s roaring she would drink all the vast, Foggy and sinister perfume of your conquests, And as you convulsed in ecstasy she would whistle a red and yellow sabbat! Flesh torn, bodies cut open and gutted, the blood sp urting! Now as my dream of your deeds reaches its climax, I lose myself completely, I stop belonging to you, I am you, My femininity is not just to be with you, it’s to be your very souls! To be inside all your brutality at the time you wreaked it, To imbibe deep down your consciousness of what you felt When you tinged the high sea with blood, When now and then you tossed to the sharks The still living bodies of the wounded and the pink ﬂesh of children, And you dragged their mothers to the deck rails to look at what happened to them! To be with you in your carnage and plundering! To be harmonized with you in the symphony of your pillages! Ah, how much and in how many ways I’d like to be yours! To be not only your woman, not only your women, not only your victims, Not only your victimized men, women, children and ships, To be not only that hour and the vessels and the waves, Not only your souls, your bodies, your rage, your property, To be not only the abstract orgy of your deeds in my physical self, Not only this, I’d like to be more than this—the God that’s all this! I’d have to be God, the God of an inverted faith, A monstrous and satanic God, the God of a blood-based pantheism, To be able to ﬁll up every cranny of my imaginative fury And never exhaust my desire to identify With the each and the all and the more-than-all of your conquests! Ah, torture me to cure me! Let my ﬂesh be the air your cutlasses slice Before they fall on heads and necks! Let my veins be the clothes your knives rip right through! My imagination the body of the women you rape! My mind the deck you stand on while killing! My entire life—in its nervous, hysterical, absurd ensemble— The great organism in which every act of piracy ever committed Would be a conscious cell, and all of me would spin As a huge, rocking putridity, embodying all of this! The feverish machine of my teeming visions Now spins at such frightening, inordinate speed That my ﬂywheel consciousness Is just a blurry circle whirring in the air. Fifteen men on a dead man’s chest, Yo-ho-ho and a bottle of rum! Hey-la-oh-la-oh-la-OH----l a-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah----ah-ah-ah... Ah! the savagery of this savagery! To hell With every life like ours, which has none of this! Look at me: an engineer! Necessarily practical, sensitive to everything, Static in comparison to you, even when I walk; Inert, even when I act; weak, even when I assert myself; Stagnant, shattered, a fainthearted renegade of your Glory, Of your shrill, hot and bloody dyna mic! Damn my inability to turn my delirium into action! Damn my always hanging on to civilization’s apron strings! Damn the dainty manners I carry on my back like a bale of lace! Errand boys of modern humanitarianism—that’s what we all are! A sorry lot of consumptives, neurasthenics, and phlegmatics, Without the courage to be violent and daring men, Our souls tied up like a chicken by the leg! Ah, pirates! pirates! The yearning for lawlessness coupled with brutality, The yearning for absolutely cruel and abominable things, Gnawing like an abstract lust at our delicate bodies, At our squeamish and effeminate nerves, And bringing mad fevers into our empty gazes! Make me kneel down before you! Beat and humiliate me! Make me your slave and your plaything! And don’t ever deprive me of your contempt! O my masters! O my lords! To always gloriously take the submissive part In bloody deeds and endless sensualities! Fall on me like massive walls, O barbarians of the ancient sea! Rip me and wound me! Streak my body with blood From east to west! Kiss with cutlasses, whips and rage My blissful carnal fear of belonging to you, My masochistic yearning to submit to your fury, To be the sentient, impassive object of your omnivorous cruelty, Rulers, lords, emperors, pirates! Ah, torture me, Rip me apart! And once I’ve been hacked into conscious pieces, Strew me over the decks, Scatter me across the waters, leave me On the voracious beaches of islands! Satiate in me all my mysticism of you! Engrave my soul in blood! Cut and slash! O tattooers of my bodily imagination! Beloved ﬂayers of my ﬂeshly submission! Subdue me like a dog that’s kicked to death! Make me the vessel of your lordly disdain! Make me all your victims! As Christ suffered for all men, I want to suffer For all who’ve been victims at your hands, Your callused and bloody han ds, with ﬁngers lopped off In sudden attacks at the gunwales! Make me into something that’s dragged —O pleasure, O beloved pain!— As if behind horses whipped by you... But all this at sea, at se-e-e-ea, at SE-E-E-E-EA! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! HEY-EY-EY-EY- EY-EY-EY! At S-E-E-E-EA! Yey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Yey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Yey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey- ey-ey! Everything shouts out! Every last thing shouts! Winds, waves, boats, Seas, topsails, pirates, my heart, blood, and the air, the air! Hey-ey-ey-ey! Yey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Yey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Everything shouts out in song! FIFTEEN MEN ON A DEAD MAN’S CHEST. YO-HO-HO AND A BOTTLE OF RUM! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! Hey-ey-ey-ey- ey-ey-ey! Hey-la-oh-la-oh-la-OH-O-O-o-o-la-ah-ah-ah----ah-ah-ah! AHO-O-O-O-O-O-O-O-O-O-O---yyy!... SCHOONER AHO-O-O-O-O-O-O-O-O-O---- yyy!... Darby M’Graw-aw-aw-aw-aw-aw! DARBY M’GRAW-AW-AW-AW-AW-AW-AW! FETCH A-A-AFT THE RU-U-U-U-U-UM, DARBY! Hey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey-ey! HEY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY! HEY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY! HEY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY! HEY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY-EY! Something in me snaps. The red has turned to dusk. I felt too much to be able to keep on feeling. My soul is spent, only an echo in me remains. The ﬂywheel is slowing down. My dreams lift their hands a bit from my eyes. There’s nothing in me but a void, a desert, a nocturnal sea. And as soon as I feel this nocturnal sea in me, Then again, yet again, from out of the silence Of its endless distance, the vast and age-old cry arises. Like a lightning ﬂash of sound—soothing, not noisy— Suddenly encompassing all the wet maritime Horizon and dark human surging in the night, Like the voice of a distant siren weeping, calling, it rises From the depths of the Far, the depths of the Sea, the heart of the Abyss, And on the surface, like seaweed, ﬂoat my broken dreams... Aho-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o----y y... Schooner aho-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o----y y... Ah, the freshness of dew on my exhilaration! The coolness of night on my inner ocean! Everything in me suddenly beholds a night at sea Full of the vast and utterly human mystery of the nocturnal waves. The moon rises on the horizon And my happy childhood wells up in me like a tear. My past resurfaces, as if that mariner’s cry Were a scent, a voice, the echo of a song Calling up from my past That happiness I’ll never again know. It was in the old peaceful house by the river... (My bedroom windows, like the dining room windows, Looked out over some low-lying houses and, just beyond them, the river, The Tagus, this very same Tagus but at a point further down. If today I gazed out the same windows, I wouldn’t gaze out the same windows. That time has passed like smoke from a steamer on the high sea...) An inexplicable feeling of tenderness, A tearful and heartfelt remorse, For all those victims— especially the children— I dreamed of hurting when I dreamed I was a pirate of old... A feeling of regret, since they were my victims; A soft and tender feeling, since they weren’t really. A confused emotion, bluish like a fogged window, Sings old songs in my poor grieving heart. Ah, how could I think or dream those things? How far I am from what I was a few minutes ago! What hysterical feelings—ﬁrst one thing, then the opposite! As the blond morning rises, funny how my ears hear only Things that concur with this emotion—the lapping of the waters, The river water’s gentle lapping against the wharf ..., The sailboat passing along the river’s far shore, The distant, Japanese-blue hills, The houses of Almada, And whatever’s soft and childlike in the early morning hours!... A seagull passes by And my tenderness increases. But all this time I wasn’t paying any attention. All those things I felt were only skin-deep, like a caress. All this time I never took my eyes off my distant dream, My house by the river, My childhood by the river, My bedroom windows looking out onto the river at night, And the peace of the moonlight scattered over the waters! My old aunt, who loved me because of the son she’d lost... My old aunt used to sing me to sleep (Even though I was already too old for this). The memory makes tears fall on my heart, cleansing it of life, And a light sea breeze wafts inside me. Sometimes she sang “The Good Ship Catrineta”: There goes the Catrineta Over the waves of the sea... And at other times it was “The Fair Princess,” with its wistful, Medieval melody . . . I recall this, and her poor old voice rises in me, Reminding me how little I’ve thought of her since then, and she loved me so much! How ungrateful I’ve been to her—and what have I done with my life? Yes, “The Fair Princess” . . . I’d close my eyes as she sang: The Fair Princess Sat in her garden... And I’d open my eyes just a sliver, see the window full of moonlight, And shut them again, and in all of this I was happy. The Fair Princess Sat in her garden Combing her hair With her golden comb . . . O my childhood days, a doll someone broke! If I could only go back in time, to that house and that affection, And remain there forever, forever a child and forever happy! But all of this is the Past, a lantern on an old street corner. To remember it makes me cold, and hungry for something unobtainable. To think of it makes me feel an absurd regret for I don’t know what. O slow whirlpool of conﬂicting sensations! Faint vertigo of confused things in my soul! Shattered furies, tender feelings like spools of thread children play with, Avalanches of imagination over the eyes of my senses, Tears, useless tears, Light breezes of contradiction grazing my soul... To shake off this emotion, I invoke with a conscious effort, I invoke with a desperate, worthless, arid effort The song of the Great Pirate as he was dying: Fifteen men on a dead man’s chest, Yo-ho-ho and a bottle of rum! But the song is a straight line drawn crookedly inside me... With a struggle I’m able, but through an almost literary imagination, To bring back into my soul’s ﬁeld of vision The rage of piracy, of slaughter, the almost mouth-watering appetite for pillage, For the frivolous slaughter of women and children, For the gratuitous torture of poorer passengers, merely to amuse ourselves, And the sensuality of breaking and shattering the things others most cherish, But I dream all this while dreading something breathing down my neck. I remember how interesting it would be To hang sons before their mothers’ eyes (But I can’t help but feel like the mothers), To bury alive four-year-old children on desert isles, Taking their parents there in boats to see (But I shudder, remembering the son I don’t have who’s quietly sleeping at home). I try to stir a dead yearning for sea crimes, For an inquisition without the excuse of Faith, Crimes without even any wrath or malice behind them, Carried out mechanically, not to hurt, not to harm And not even to amuse ourselves, but just to pass the time, Like country people who play solitaire at the dining table after dinner, with the tablecloth pushed to one side, Just for the soothing pleasure of committing heinous crimes and thinking nothing of it, Of watching suffering victims reach the brink of madness and death-from-pain without letting them cross it... But my imagination refuses to go along. A shiver runs through me. And suddenly, more suddenly than before, from farther away and deeper down, Suddenly—oh the terror coursing through my veins! Oh the sudden cold from the door to Mystery which opened in me and let in a draft!— I remember God, the Transcendent in life, and suddenly The old voice of the English sailor Jim Barnes, whom I used to talk with, Becomes in me the voice of my mysterious affection for silly things like a mother’s lap and a sister’s hair ribbon, A voice arriving miraculously from beyond the appearance of things, The faint and remote Voice that’s now the Absolute Voice, the Mouthless Voice, Arriving from above and from within the seas’ nocturnal solitude, Calling me, calling me, calling me... It comes faintly, as if mufﬂed but still audible, From far away, as if it sounded elsewhere and couldn’t be heard here, Like a stiﬂed sob, a snuffed ﬂame, a silent breath, From no corner in space, from no place in time, The eternal cry of night, the deep and confused murmur: Aho-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o- - - yyy . . . . . . Aho-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o----yyy . . . . . . . . . Schooner aho-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-----yy . . . . . . A cold chill from the soul makes my whole body shiver, And I suddenly open my eyes, which I hadn’t closed. Ah, how good to emerge once and for all from my dreams! To return to the real world, so easy on the nerves! The world on this early morning when the day’s ﬁrst steamers are arriving... I’m no longer interested in the incoming steamer from before. It’s still far away. Only what’s close now cleanses my soul. My healthy, rugged, pragmatic imagination Is concerned now only with useful, modern things, With freighters, steamers and passengers, With rugged, immediate, modern, commercial, real things. The ﬂywheel in me is slowing down. Wonderful modern maritime life— Clean, ﬁt, and full of machines! All so well ordered, so spontaneously organized, All the machine parts, all oceangoing vessels, All aspects of import and export trade activity So perfectly integrated That everything seems to happen by natural laws, Nothing ever colliding with anything else! Nothing has lost its poetry. And now there are also machines With their poetry, and this entirely new kind of life, This commercial, worldly, intellectual and sentimental life Which the machine age has conferred on our souls. Voyages are as lovely as they ever were, And a ship will always be lovely, just because it is a ship. Travel is still travel, and the faraway is where it has always been: Nowhere at all, thank God! The ports full of every kind of steamer! Large and small, of various colors, their portholes variously arranged, And belonging to so wonderfully many shipping lines! Steamers in port, so individual in their separate berths! So attractive in their stately calm of commercial things that ply the sea, The ancient and forever Homeric sea, O Ulysses! The humanitarian glance of lighthouses far off in the night! Or the sudden ﬂashing of a nearby lighthouse on a dark dark night (“How close we were to the coast!” And the sound of the water sings in our ear!)... All this is as it always was, but today there’s commerce, And the commercial destiny of the great steamers Makes me proud of my era! The variety of people aboard passenger ships Fills me with the modern pride of living at a time when it’s so easy For races to mix together and distances to be crossed, so easy to see everything And enjoy life, making a good number of dreams come true. Neat, orderly and modern like an ofﬁce with service windows made of latticed yellow wire, My present feelings—natural and discreet like gentlemen— Are practical and free of hysteria, ﬁlling their lungs with ocean air Like people perfectly aware of how healthy it is to breathe air from the sea. The day is now deﬁnitely geared for working, Everything begins to move, to get organized. With great immediate and natural pleasure I follow with my soul All the commercial operations needed for a shipment of goods. My era is the rubber stamp appearing on all invoices, And I feel that all letters from all ofﬁces Should be addressed to me. A bill of lading is so distinctive, And a ship captain’s signature so handsome and modern! The commercial formality at the beginning and end of letters: Dear Sirs—Messieurs —Amigos e Senhores, Yours faithfully—Nos salutations empressées... All of this isn’t only human and tidy but also beautiful, And it ultimately has a maritime destiny: a steamer on which are loaded The goods named in the letters and invoices. Life’s complexity! Though drawn up by people Who love, hate, have political passions and sometimes commit crimes, The invoices are so neat, so well written, so independent of all that! Some people look at an invoice and don’t feel this. Surely you felt it, Cesário Verde. And I feel it so humanly it makes me cry. Don’t try to tell me there’s no poetry in business and in ofﬁces! It enters through every pore ...I breathe it in this ocean air, Because all of this concerns steamers and modern navigation, Because invoices and business letters are the beginning of the story, And the ships carrying the goods across the eternal sea are the end. Ah, and the voyages—holiday voyages and other kinds... Voyages on the sea, where we’re all companions In a special way, as if a maritime mystery Brought our souls together and transformed us for a moment Into transient citizens of the same uncertain country, Eternally moving over the vastness of the waters! Grand hotels of the Inﬁnite, O my transatlantic ships! Totally and perfectly cosmopolitan, for you never stay long in one place, And you contain every sort of face, costume and race! Voyages, voyagers—so many different kinds! So many nationalities, professions and people in the world! So many different directions one can take in life, In this life which at heart is always, always the same life! So many curious faces! All faces are curious, And nothing makes for holiness like constantly looking at people. Brotherhood is not after all a revolutionary idea. It’s something we learn in daily life, where everything has to be tolerated. And we begin to appreciate what we have to tolerate, Until we nearly weep with affection for what we once tolerated! Ah, all this is beautiful, all this is human and linked To human feelings, so sociable and bourgeois, So complexly simple, so metaphysically sad! The diversiﬁed, ﬂoating life ends up educating us in humanity. Poor humans! Poor humans all of us! I take leave of this moment in the person of this other ship Which is now setting sail. It’s an English tramp steamer, Quite grungy, as if it were a French ship, With the friendly air of a seaborne proletarian, And no doubt mentioned on the back page of yesterday’s papers. My heart goes out to the poor steamer, so humble and unaffected. It seems to feel responsible for something, to be an honest person, Faithful to some duty or other. There it goes, leaving its berth in front of where I’m sitting on the wharf. There it goes, placidly passing where sailing ships once passed, Long, long ago... To Cardiff? Liverpool? London? It doesn’t matter. It does its duty. As we should do ours. Marvelous life! Bon voyage! Bon voyage! Bon voyage, my poor chance friend who did me the favor Of taking with you the sadness and delirium of my dreams, Restoring me to life so I can watch you and see you sail aw a y. Bon voyage! Bon voyage! That’s what life is... With what natural elegance so typical of morning You sail tall and straight from out of Lisbon’s harbor today! I feel strangely endeared and grateful to you for this... For this what? Who knows what!...Go on...Sail away... With a slight quiver (Tch-tch--tch---tch----tch-----tch ...) The ﬂywheel in me comes to a halt. Sail away, slow steamer, sail and don’t stay... Sail away from me, sail out of my sight, Depart from inside my heart, Disappear into the Faraway, the Faraway, the mist of God, Disappear, follow your destiny and leave me... Who am I to weep for you and question you? Who am I to speak to you and love you? Who am I to be troubled by the sight of you? It pushes off from the wharf, the sun rises golden, shines brighter, Glancing off the rooftops of the buildings on the wharf. The whole of this side of the city is gleaming... Depart, leave me, become First the ship in mid-river, separate and distinct, Then a small, black ship headed toward the bar, Then a hazy point on the horizon (O anxiety!), An ever hazier point on the horizon... Then nothing, just me and my sadness, And the great city now bathed in sunlight, And the real, naked hour like a wharf without ships, And the slow turning of the crane, like a turning compass, Tracing a semicircle of I don’t know what emotion In the staggered silence of my soul... 