We crossed paths on a downtown Lisbon street, and he came up to me In his shabby clothes, with Professional Beggar written all over his face, Drawn to me by some afﬁnity that I also feel for him, And with a broad, effusive gesture I reciprocally gave him all I had (Except, of course, what was in the pocket where I keep more money: I’m no fool, nor a zealous Russian novelist, Just a Romantic, and that in moderation ...). I feel sympathy for people like him, Especially when they don’t deserve sympathy. Yes, I too am a beggar and a bum, And likewise through no one’s fault but my own. To be a beggar and a bum doesn’t mean you’re a beggar and a bum: It means you’re unconnected to the social ladder, It means you’re unadaptable to life’s norms, To life’s real or sentimental norms— It means you’re not a High Court judge, a nine to ﬁve employee, or a whore, Not genuinely poor or an exploited worker, Not sick with an incurable disease, Not thirsty for justice, or a cavalry ofﬁcer, Not, in short, within any of those social categories depicted by novelists Who pour themselves out on paper because they have good reasons for shedding tears And who rebel against society because their good reasons make them think they’re rebels. No: anything but having good reasons! Anything but caring about humanity! Anything but giving in to humanitarianism! What good is a feeling if there’s an external reason for it? Yes, being a beggar and a bum like me Isn’t just being a beggar and a bum, which is commonplace; It’s being a bum by virtue of being isolated in your soul, It’s being a beggar because you have to beg the days to go by and leave you alone. All the rest is stupid, like Dostoyevsky or Gorky. All the rest is going hungry or having no clothes. And even if this happens, it happens to so many people That it’s not worth the trouble to trouble over those it happens to. I’m a beggar and a bum in the truest sense, namely the ﬁgurative sense, And I’m wallowing in heartfelt compassion for myself. Poor Álvaro de Campos! So isolated in life! So depressed! Poor guy, sunken in the armchair of his melancholy! Poor guy, who this very day, with (genuine) tears in his eyes And with a broad, liberal, Muscovite gesture, Gave all he had—from the pocket where he had little— To that poor man who wasn’t poor, who had professionally sad eyes. Poor Álvaro de Campos, whom nobody cares about! Poor Álvaro, who feels so sorry for himself! Yes, the poor guy! Poorer than many who are bums and bum around Or who are beggars and beg, Because the human soul is an abyss. I should know. Poor guy! How splendid to be able to rebel at rallies in my soul! But I’m no fool! And I don’t have the excuse of being socially concerned. I have no excuse at all: I’m lucid. Don’t try to persuade me otherwise: I’m lucid. It’s like I said: I’m lucid. Don’t talk to me about aesthetics with a heart: I’m lucid. Shit! I’m lucid.