EXCERPTS FROM TWO ODES I Come, ancient and unchanging Night, Queen Night who was born dethroned, Night inwardly equal to silence, Night With sequin-stars that ﬂicker In your dress fringed by Inﬁnity. Come faintly, Come softly, Come alone, solemn, with hands hanging At your sides, come And bring the far-off hills as near as the nearby trees, Merge every ﬁeld I see into your one ﬁeld, Make the mountain one more block of your body, Erase all its differences I see from afar, All the roads that climb it, All the varied trees that make it dark green in the distance, All the white houses whose smoke rises through the trees, And leave just one light, and another light, and one more light In the hazy and vaguely troubling distance, In the distance that’s suddenly impossible to cross. Our Lady Of the impossible things we seek in vain, Of the dreams that come to us at dusk, by the window, Of the plans that caress us On sweeping terraces of cosmopolitan hotels To the European sound of songs and voices near and far And that pain us, for we know we’ll never carry them out... Come lull us, Come cuddle us, Kiss us softly on the forehead, So gently on the forehead we wouldn’t know we’d been kissed Were it not for a slight change in our soul And the hint of a sigh rising melodiously From the most ancient part of us In which are rooted all those wondrous trees Whose fruits are the dreams we love and cherish Because we know they have nothing to do with the things of life. Come ever so solemnly, Solemn and full Of a secret desire to weep, Perhaps because the soul is vast and life small, And none of our gestures ever leaves our body, And we can reach only as far as our arm reaches, And can see only as far as our sight extends. Come, ever sorrowful, Mater Dolorosa of the Sufferings of the Meek, Turris Eburnea of the Sorrows of the Scorned, Cool hand on the feverish brow of the Humble, Taste of water on the parched lips of the Weary. Come out from the depths Of the pallid horizon, Come pull me out Of the soil of anxiety and barrenness Where I thrive. Pluck me, a forgotten daisy, from my soil. Read in my petals I can’t imagine what fortune And strip them off to your satisfaction, Your cool and quiet satisfaction. Fling one of my petals to the North, Home to the cities of Today I so loved. Fling another of my petals to the South, Home to the seas the Navigators plowed. Throw another petal Westward, Where what seems to be the Future glows red hot, And I adore it even though it’s unknown to me. And throw another, the others, all that’s left of me To the East, To the East from where everything comes, faith and the new day, To the grandiose and fanatic and warm East, To the extravagant East which I’ll never see, To the Buddhist, Brahmanist, Shintoist East, To the East which is everything we don’t have, Which is everything we’re not, To the East where—who knows?—perhaps Christ still lives, Where perhaps God really exists and rules over all... Come over the seas, Over the widest seas, Over the seas without deﬁnite horizons, Come and pass your hand over the back of that wild, watery beast, Mysteriously calming it, O hypnotic tamer of greatly agitated things! Come, ever considerate, Come, ever maternal, Come on tiptoe, ancient nurse who sat At the bedside of the gods of lost religions And witnessed the birth of Jehovah and Jupiter And smiled because for you all is false and useless. Come, silent and ecstatic Night, Come wrap your white mantle Around my heart, Serenely like a breeze on a balmy afternoon, Gently like a mother’s soothing gesture, With the stars shimmering in your hands And the moon a mysterious mask on your face. All sounds sound different When you come. All voices hush when you enter. No one sees you enter. No one knows when you have entered Except of a sudden, when everything starts to withdraw, When everything loses its edges and colors, And high above, in the still bluish sky, As a distinct crescent, a white circle, or just a sliver of new light, The moon begins to be real. II Ah the twilight, nightfall, the lights turning on in big cities, And the hand of mystery that stills the hubbub, And the weariness weighing on everything in us, hindering An active and accurate feeling of Life! Each street is a canal in a Venice of tediums, And how mysterious the unanimous end of the streets When the night falls, O my master Cesário Verde, Who wrote “Sentiment of a Westerner”! What profound restlessness, what longing for other things That aren’t countries or moments or lives! What longing for perhaps other kinds of moods Inwardly moistens this lingering, remote instant! A horror that sleepwalks among the city’s ﬁrst lights, A mild and ﬂuid terror that leans against street corners Like a beggar waiting for impossible sensations Without knowing who might bestow them . . . When I die, When I go away—ingloriously, like everyone— Down that road whose very idea we can’t face directly, Through that door we’d never take if we could choose, Toward that port that’s unknown to the captain of the Ship, Let it be at this hour of day, worthy of all the tedium I’ve suffered, This ancient and spiritual and mystical hour, This hour in which perhaps, much longer ago than it seems, Plato, dreaming, saw the idea of God Shaping body and existence as something perfectly plausible In his thoughts externalized like a ﬁeld. Let it be at this hour that you take me off to be buried, At this hour when I don’t know how to live, When I don’t know what to feel or pretend I feel, At this hour whose mercy is tortured and excessive, Whose shadows come from something other than things, Whose passing drags no robes over the ground of Sensible Life Nor leaves any fragrance on the paths of Sight. Cross your hands on your knee, O consort I don’t have or wish to have, Cross your hands on your knee and look at me in silence At this hour when I can’t see that you’re looking at me, Look at me in silence and in secret, and ask yourself —You who know me—who I am...   