OPIARY It’s before I take opium that my soul is sick. To feel life is to wilt like a convalescent, And so I seek in opium’s consolation An East to the east of the East. This life on board is sure to kill me. Fever rages in my head day and night. And although I search until I’m ill, I can’t ﬁnd the spring to set me right. In paradox and astral incompetence, In golden folds I live my days, A wave in which dignity’s a descent And pleasures are ganglia of my malaise. It’s through a clockwork of disasters, A mechanism of pseudo-ﬂywheels, That I walk among visions of gallows In a garden of stemless, ﬂoating ﬂowers. I stagger through the handiwork Of an inner life of lace and lacquer. It’s as though at home I had the knife That beheaded St. John the Baptist. I’m atoning for a crime in a suitcase That my grandfather committed for fun. My nerves hang from the gibbet by the dozen, And I’ve fallen into the pit of opium. With the soporiﬁc nudge of morphine I lose myself in throbbing transparencies, And on a diamond-studded night the moon Rises as if it were my Destiny. Always a bad student, now I simply watch the ship plow on Through the Suez Canal, carrying along My life, mere camphor in the dawn. Gone are the days I put to good use. All I earned from my work was fatigue, Which feels today like an arm round my neck That chokes me and keeps me from falling. I was a child like everyone else, Born in a small town, Portuguese, And I’ve met people from England Who say I speak English with ease. I’d like to have poems and stories Published by Plon and Mércure, But I doubt this life—a voyage Without storms—can long endure! Though it has its amusing moments, Life on board is a sad affair. I talk with Germans, Swedes and Brits, But the pain of living is always there. To sail East to see China and India Wasn’t worth it after all. There’s only one way of living, And the earth’s the same, and small. That’s why I take opium. As a medicine. I’m convalescing from the Moment. I live on thought’s ground ﬂoor, And to see Life go by is a torment. I smoke. I yawn. Were there only an earth Where far to the east didn’t become west! Why did I visit the India that exists, If there’s no India but the soul I possess? Disgrace was my only legacy. The gypsies stole my Fortune. Perhaps not even near death will I see A shelter to keep me warm. I pretended to study engineering. Lived in Scotland. Saw Ireland on holiday. Outside the doors of Happiness my heart Begs for alms like a little old lady. Don’t call, iron ship, at Port Said! Turn right, I don’t even know where to. I pass the days with the count in the smoking room— A swindling French count who lingers at funerals. I glumly return to Europe, destined To become a sleepwalking poet. I’m a monarchist but not a Catholic, And I’d like to be someone of note. I’d like to have money and beliefs, To be various dull people I’ve seen. As things stand now, I’m nothing But a passenger on a ship at sea. I don’t have any personality. Even the cabin boy makes a more lasting Impression with his lofty bearing Of a Scottish laird who’s been fasting. I don’t belong anywhere. My country Is wherever I’m not. I’m sick and weak. The steward is a rogue. He saw me With the Swedish lady ...and w inked. One day I’ll cause a scandal on board Just to make the others tattle. I’m fed up with life and think it’s natural That sometimes I ﬂy off the handle. I spend all day smoking and drinking American drugs that numb every pain— I, who am already naturally drunk! My rose-like nerves need a better brain. I can hardly even feel the talent I have for writing these lines. Life is a big house in the country That would bore any sensitive mind. The English were made for existence. No people has a closer alliance With Tranquility. Put in a coin And out comes an Englishman, all smiles. I belong to that class of Portuguese Who, once India was discovered, were out Of work. Death is a sure thing. This is something I often think about. To hell with life and having to live it! I don’t even read the book by my bed. I’m sick of the East. It’s a painted mat Whose beauty, once rolled up, is dead. So I fall into opium. It’s too much To expect me to live one of those ideal Lives. Honest people with set times For going to bed and taking their meals Can go to the devil! Yes, this is envy. These keyed-up nerves are my demise. If only some ship could take me to where I’d want only what I see with my eyes. Who am I fooling? I’d still get bored. I’d want a yet stronger opium, by which To reach dreams that would ﬁnish me off And pitch me into a muddy ditch. Fever! If what I have isn’t fever, Then I don’t know what fever’s like. The essential fact is that I’m sick. This hare, friends, has outrun its luck. Night has fallen. There’s the ﬁrst blast Announcing dinner: time to get spruce. Social life above all else! We’ll promenade Like dogs until we work our collars loose. This story is bound to have a less Than happy close, with blood and a gun (Hooray!) at the end of my restlessness, For which nothing can be done. Whoever sees me must ﬁnd me banal, Me and my life ...A yo ung chap, right! Even my monocle makes me belong To a universal stereotype. How many people like me toe the Line And, like me, are mystics! How many, under their de rigueur jackets, Feel, like me, the horror of existence! If at least I could be as interesting On the outside as I am inwardly! I’m spiraling toward the Maelstrom’s center. My doing nothing is what condemned me. A do-nothing, yes, but with good reason! Could I but hold everyone in disdain And be, even if dressed in a shabby suit, A hero, handsome, damned, or insane! I feel like sticking my hands in my mouth And biting until I shake with pain. It would be an original activity And amuse the others, the so-called sane. Absurdity, like a ﬂower from the India I never found in India, sprouts In my sick and tired brain.  God Change my life or else snuff it out... Let me stay here, in this chair, Until they pack me into a casket. I was born to be a mandarin But lack the serenity, tea, and mat. Ah, how I’d love to fall right from here Through a trapdoor—clack!—to my grave! Life tastes to me like mild tobacco. All I ever did was smoke life away. What I really want is faith and peace And to get these sensations under control. Put an end to this, God! Open the ﬂoodgates! Enough of this comedy in my soul!  . Aboard ship in the Suez Canal.