Whoever or whatever is at the center of the world Gave me the outer world as an example of Reality, And when I say “this is real,” even of a feeling, I can’t help but see it in some kind of external space, In a visual kind of way, outside and apart from me. Being real means not being inside myself. My inner self doesn’t have any reality I can conceive of. I know the world exists, but I don’t know if I do. I’m more certain of the existence of my white house Than of the inner existence of the white house’s owner. I believe in my body more than in my soul, Since my body’s right here in the midst of reality, It can be seen by others, It can touch others, It can sit down and stand up, Whereas my soul can’t be deﬁned except by outer terms. It exists for me—in the moments when I think it exists— By borrowing from the World’s outer reality. If the soul is more real Than the outer world, as you, philosopher, say it is, Then why was the outer world given to me as reality’s prototype? If my feeling is more certain Than the existence of the thing I feel, Then why do I feel that thing and why does it appear Independently of me, Without needing me to exist— Me, who am forever bound to myself, forever personal and nontransferable? Why do I move with other people In a world where we understand each other and coincide, If the world is what’s mistaken and I’m the one who’s right? If the world is a mistake, it’s a mistake for everybody, Whereas each of us is just his own mistake. Between the two, the world is more in the right. But why all these questions, unless it’s because I’m sick? On the outer and therefore right days of my life, On the days when I’m perfectly, naturally lucid, I feel without feeling that I feel, I see without knowing that I see, And the Universe is never so real as then, The Universe is never (it’s not near or far from me But) so sublimely not-mine. When in life I say “it’s obvious,” do I mean “only I can see it”? When in life I say “it’s true,” do I mean “it’s my opinion”? When in life I say “it’s there,” do I mean “it’s not there”? And why should it be any different in philosophy? We live before we philosophize, we exist before we know we do, And the earlier fact merits at least homage and precedence. Yes, we are outer before we are inner. Therefore we are essentially outer. You say, sick philosopher, every philosopher, that this is materialism. But how can this be materialism, if materialism is a philosophy, If a philosophy, to belong to me, would have to be a philosophy of mine, And none of this is mine, nor am I even I?   