THE CHESS PLAYERS I’ve heard that once, during I don’t know What war of Persia, When invaders rampaged through the City And the women screamed, Two chess players kept on playing Their endless game. In the shade of a leafy tree they stared At the old chessboard, And next to each player was a mug of wine, Solemnly ready To quench his thirst in the moments when, Having made his move, He could sit back and relax, waiting On his opponent. Houses were burning, walls were torn down And coffers plundered; Women were raped and propped against The crumbling walls; Children, pierced by spears, were so much Blood in the streets... But the two chess players stayed where they were, Close to the city And far from its clamor, and kept on playing Their game of chess. Even if, in the bleak wind’s messages, They heard the screams And, upon reﬂection, knew in their hearts That surely their women And their tender daughters were being raped In the nearby distance, Even if, in the moment they thought this, A ﬂeeting shadow Passed over their hazy, oblivious brows, Soon their calm eyes Returned with conﬁdent attention To the old chessboard. When the ivory king’s in danger, who cares About the ﬂesh and blood Of sisters and mothers and little children? When the rook can’t cover The retreat of the white queen, what Does pillaging matter? And when with sure hand the opponent’s king Is placed in check, It hardly concerns one’s soul that children Are dying in the distance. Even if the infuriated face Of an invading warrior Should suddenly peer over the wall and cause The solemn chess player To fall right there in a bloody heap, The moment before that Was still devoted to the favorite game Of the supremely indifferent. Let cities fall and people suffer, Let life and freedom Perish, let secure, ancestral properties Be burned and uprooted, But when war interrupts the game, make sure The king’s not in check And the most advanced of the ivory pawns Is ready to redeem the rook. My brothers in loving Epicurus And in understanding him More in accord with our view than with his, Let’s learn from the story Of the impassive chess players how To spend our lives. Let serious things scarcely matter to us And grave things weigh little, And let the natural drive of instincts yield To the futile pleasure (In the peaceful shade of the trees) Of playing a good game. Whatever we take from this useless life, Be it glory or fame, Love, science, or life itself, It’s worth no more Than the memory of a well-played game And a match won Against a better player. Glory weighs like an overlarge burden And fame like a fever, Love wearies, for it ardently searches, Science never ﬁnds, And life grieves, for it knows it is passing... The game of chess Completely absorbs one’s heart but weighs little When lost, for it’s nothing. Ah, in the shade that unconsciously loves us And with a mug of wine At our side, intent only on the useless Effort of the chess game, Even if the game is only a dream And we have no partner, Let’s do as the Persians of this story: Wherever out there, Near or faraway, war and our country And life are calling us, Let them call in vain, while we dream In the friendly shade Of our partners, and the chess game dreams Of its indifference.   